# Builder Pattern

In summary, the Builder pattern is a good choice when designing classes whose constructors or static factories would have more than a handful of parameters, especially if most of those parameters are optional. Client code is much easier to read and write with builders than with the traditional telescoping constructor pattern, and builders are much safer than JavaBeans.

## Advantages
The traditional Abstract Factory implementation in Java has been the Class object, with the newInstance method playing the part of the build method. This usage is fraught with problems. The newInstance method always attempts to invoke the class’s parameterless constructor, which may not even exist. You don’t get a compile-time error if the class has no accessible parameterless constructor. Instead, the client code must cope with InstantiationException or IllegalAccessException at runtime, which is ugly and inconvenient. Also, the newInstance method propagates any exceptions thrown by the parameterless constructor, even though newInstance lacks the corresponding throws clauses. In other words, Class.newInstance breaks compile-time exception checking. The Builder interface, shown above, corrects these deficiencies.

## Disadvantages
The Builder pattern does have disadvantages of its own. In order to create an object, you must first create its builder. While the cost of creating the builder is unlikely to be noticeable in practice, it could be a problem in some performance-critical situations. Also, the Builder pattern is more verbose than the telescoping constructor pattern, so it should be used only if there are enough parameters, say, four or more. But keep in mind that you may want to add parameters in the future. If you start out with constructors or static factories, and add a builder when the class evolves to the point where the number of parameters starts to get out of hand, the obsolete constructors or static factories will stick out like a sore thumb. Therefore, it’s often better to start with a builder in the first place.
